Replace aws-auth with Leapp (#540)
cloudposse/docs: content/howto/geodesic/authenticate-with-leapp.md

---
title: "Authenticate with AWS using Leapp"
description: "Learn how to use Leapp to supply AWS credentials to tools used within Geodesic."
weight: 1
---
## Intro

In this how-to, we will help you get started using Geodesic to work with AWS

> resources by helping you set up and use Leapp.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
resources by helping you set up and use [Leapp](https://github.com/Noovolari/leapp).
```

> resources by helping you set up and use [Leapp](https://leapp.cloud).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
resources by helping you set up and use [Leapp](https://leapp.cloud) to authenticate.
```

  - `https://something.awsapps.com/start`
- The region in which AWS SSO has been deployed. This may or may not be the same
region you will be working in.

##### AWS IAM User

If you are a regular IAM User who can log into the AWS Console, you should
log into the AWS Console while setting up Leapp. Choose "My Security Credentials" 
from the Account drop-down menu:
- Copy and paste your MFA ARN or Serial Number from "Assigned MFA device" 
- Click on "Create access key" to create a new access key and copy the
Access Key ID and Secret Access Key from the console and paste directly into 
the appropriate fields in Leapp. 

## How-To

### Start Geodesic

If you are a Cloud Posse client, you will have a customized version of Geodesic
that sets an initial value for the environment variable `AWS_PROFILE`. Alternatively,
you may have customized it yourself, or you may want to. In any case, we will 
go with what you have. So start Geodesic, and at the command prompt, type

```bash
echo $AWS_PROFILE
```

This is the value you will give to the profile in Leapp when you configure it.
If the output of `echo` is blank, use "default" for the profile name.

### Install and Configure Leapp

> We are not going to duplicate (and try to keep in sync with updates to) Leapp's
> own documentation on how to install and configure Leapp. We will just give 
> you the big picture steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please refer to the official Leapp documentation for the latest instructions on configuration. High-level, it's pretty easy, but you will need some configuration information that only your AWS admins can provide (if you don't already know the settings).
```

side of the page: **Tutorials > AWS**

- If you have a **Federated Login**, pick "AWS IAM Federated Role". Most of the 
tutorial is about how to configure Federated Login itself, and you can skip
all that. Just follow the last step: "Setup in Leapp". 
- Otherwise, pick "AWS SSO" or "AWS IAM User" and follow the steps.

### Log in using Leapp

Leapp provides 2 UIs for logging into or out of a session. There is a system-wide menu item
in the taskbar on Windows systems or as a "status menu" on the Mac menu bar. Click on it
and a menu will appear with all your configured session names and their corresponding
profile names. An icon for each session will appear either in gray if logged out
or orange if logged in (at least those are the current defaults for the "Light" color
scheme on macOS). Just select the menu item to toggle the state.

Alternately, you an select "Show" from the menu and be shown a richer UI where
you can do more, but still the main thing is that you click on a session name
to change its state and the indicator shows gray for logged out and orange for logged in.

> When logging in, you may be shown a miniature web browser screen and asked to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When logging in, you may see a small web browser window popup and asked to
```

log in to your IdP (e.g. Okta, Google). You may be prompted for your MFA token.
If you are using MFA, you should enable Leapp notifications so you can receive prompts
when your session expires and you need to enter a new MFA token.

### It should just work

Once you log in to AWS using Leapp, go back into Geodesic and simply hit return
at the prompt. The prompt should change from having a red ✗ and `[none]` to
having a green √ and `[default]` or whatever your profile name is. This is 
Geodesic's way of letting you know you are authorized with AWS, and what
profile you have active. 

> You can always confirm your current authentication status with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can always confirm your current authentication status by running:
```

---
title: "Authenticate with AWS using Leapp"
description: "Learn how to use Leapp to supply AWS credentials to tools used within Geodesic."
weight: 1
---
## Intro

In this how-to, we will help you get started using Geodesic to work with AWS
resources by helping you set up and use [Leapp](https://leapp.cloud) to handle 

> credentials and authentication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
credentials and authentication. Leapp is an open-source tool that makes this easier.
```
I feel like we should point this out because the landing page makes me feel like it has a SaaS component.

- `us-west-2` if anywhere else in the North America or anywhere in Central America,
- `sa-east-1` if in South America,
- `eu-north-1` if in Europe,
- `af-south-1` if in Africa,
- `ap-south-1` if in Asia, or
- `ap-southeast-2` if in Australia or Antarctica.

#### Credentials

You will have to have some way of authenticating to AWS already set up, and you
need to know the nature of your credentials. Whoever gave you access to AWS
should be able to tell you what kind of access you have. It should be one of the following:

- **Federated Role** (recommended). This means you log into something you use to
identify yourself to a lot of places (usually refered to as Single Sign-On
or SSO), and it is set up to log you into AWS with a specific IAM Role as well. 
At a company, this is usually Google Workspaces (formerly GSuite),
Okta, or Active Directory. This is also known as a SAML IdP.
- **AWS SSO**. This means your company has configured AWS as a Single Sign-On
provider. This is AWS _as_ a Single Sign-On provider, allowing you to access
multiple _permission sets_ within AWS, not using some
other Single Sign-On provider to sign in to AWS as a single IAM Role. 

> Sadly this is made even
> more confusing by the fact that even though your company has set up 
> AWS _as_ a Single Sign-On provider, you still may be using your company's
> primary SSO provider to authenticate to AWS SSO. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please note that even if your company has set up AWS _as_ a Single Sign-On provider, you still may be using your company's primary SSO provider to authenticate to AWS SSO. 
```

- **AWS IAM User**. This is the older way of authenticating to AWS, with a basic

> username (actually an email address) and password to log into the AWS console,

Reviewer: the `email` was our convention, but it can be anything.

> username (actually an email address) and password to log into the AWS console,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
username (e.g. an email address) and password to log into the AWS console,
```

> username (actually an email address) and password to log into the AWS console,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
username (e.g. an email address or some other login) and password to log into the AWS console,
```

and a long-lived "Access Key" for API access. If you are going to use this

> method, we strongly recommend you enable multi-factor authentication (MFA).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
method, we strongly recommend that you enable multi-factor authentication (MFA).
```

information with which to configure Leapp. Whoever is in charge of setting up
your access to AWS should be able to give you the information you need.

##### Federated Role

If using Federated Login, you will need
- Your IdP Single Sign-On URL. 
  - For Google Workspaces, it looks something like
    `https://accounts.google.com/o/saml2/initsso?idpid=C0asdfasdfal&spid=12344321`.
  - For Okta, it looks something like `https://company.okta.com/app/company_samlidp_1/Hka1abcke6h4P1WQr5d7/sso/saml`. 
  - Most importantly,it should not be confused with the AWS Single Sign-On URLs
  like these (**do not use these**)
    - `https://signin.aws.amazon.com/saml` (this is used by your IdP admin)
    - `https://my-sso-portal.awsapps.com/start` (this means you are using AWS SSO)
- The AWS Identity Provider ARN assigned by AWS to your IdP. Something like
  - `arn:aws:iam::123434211234:saml-provider/company-name`
- Your assigned/authorized AWS IAM Role ARN. Something like
  - `arn:aws:iam::123434211234:role/role-name`

##### AWS SSO

If using AWS SSO, you will need:

- Your AWS SSO "start URL", also known as your "portal URL". It should be 
very close to:
  - `https://something.awsapps.com/start`

> 

Reviewer 2: Also, the region in which AWS Single Sign-On has been deployed is needed in order to work.

The company implementing AWS Single Sign-On has to choose a specific aws region to deploy the service.

It's a needed field in Leapp

Author: Thank you. I will add that.

from the Account drop-down menu:
- Copy and paste your MFA ARN or Serial Number from "Assigned MFA device" 
- Click on "Create access key" to create a new access key and copy the
Access Key ID and Secret Access Key from the console and paste directly into 
the appropriate fields in Leapp. 

## How-To

### Start Geodesic

If you are a Cloud Posse client, you will have a customized version of Geodesic
that sets an initial value for the environment variable `AWS_PROFILE`. Alternatively,
you may have customized it yourself, or you may want to. In any case, we will 
go with what you have. So start Geodesic, and at the command prompt, type

```bash
echo $AWS_PROFILE
```

This is the value you will give to the profile in Leapp when you configure it.
If the output of `echo` is blank, use "default" for the profile name.

### Install and Configure Leapp

We are not going to duplicate (and try to keep in sync with updates to) Leapp's
own documentation on how to install and configure Leapp. We will just give 
you the big picture steps.

- Visit the [Leapp website](https://leapp.cloud)
- Download and install Leapp as instructed by the website

> - Follow the instructions (under "Docs") for configuring AWS

Reviewer 2: Maybe it's useful to add a link to the documentation: https://docs.leapp.cloud/

Below is some guidance to the Leapp documentation that applies as of the
time of this writing. By the time you read this it may be out of date, but
hopefully will still be of help in guiding you through the Leapp site.

##### Key Points

- The "AWS Profile" setting in Leapp must match _exactly_ the value of
`$AWS_PROFILE` you found in Geodesic in the earlier step.
- The "AWS Region" you set in Leapp should be the AWS Region you most often
use, as discussed [above](#aws-region-and-credentials).
- The "Session Alias" is completely up to you: it is the name for this
set of credentials that you will see in the UI.

> As of this writing, the Leapp documentation is at [https://docs.leapp.cloud/](https://docs.leapp.cloud/) and the best set of instructions to follow are the ones under a sub-menu on the left 

Reviewer 2: The Leapp documentation will always be at this link :)

Author: Who really knows what the future holds?

Reviewer 2: True!

> As of this writing, the Leapp documentation is at [https://docs.leapp.cloud/](https://docs.leapp.cloud/) and the best set of instructions to follow are the ones under a sub-menu on the left 

Reviewer: We don't need the disclaimer. We have hundreds of links. We have tools to validate them. 

```suggestion
The Leapp documentation is at [https://docs.leapp.cloud/](https://docs.leapp.cloud/) and the best set of instructions to follow are the ones under a sub-menu on the left 
```
